\input texinfo
@settitle Radio Manual

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2025 Roi Martin

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License''.  A copy of
the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Radio: (radio). Listen to Internet radio.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Radio Manual
@author Roi Martin (@email{jroi.martin@@gmail.com})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top Radio Manual

This manual is for Radio, a GNU Emacs package that enables users to
listen to Internet radio stations.

@menu
* Overview:: An overview of Radio.
* Configuration:: How to configure Radio.
* Usage:: How to use Radio.

Appendices
* Copying:: The GNU General Public License gives you permission to
  redistribute this program on certain terms; it also explains that
  there is no warranty.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: The license for this documentation.

Indexes
* Command Index:: An item for each standard command name.
* Variable Index:: An item for each variable documented in this manual.
* Concept Index:: An item for concepts and other general subjects.
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

Radio is a GNU Emacs package that enables users to listen to Internet
radio stations.  Its main focus is in simplicity.  It exposes the
minimum required interface to interact with a list of radio stations
and offloads media playing to an external program configured by the
user.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Package name: @code{radio}
@item
Source code repository: @url{https://github.com/jroimartin/radio}
@item
Bug tracker: @url{https://github.com/jroimartin/radio/issues}
@end itemize

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

The following configuration variables allow to customize the behavior
of the package:

@defopt radio-stations-alist
List of radio stations.

Elements are of the form @code{(@var{name} . @var{url})}.

@var{name} is the name of the radio station and @var{url} is the URL
of the radio station.
@end defopt

@defopt radio-command
Command used to play a radio station.
@end defopt

The @code{customize} interface can be used to configure these
variables.  Specifically, the @code{radio} group contains all the
relevant settings.

However, if you prefer to add the configuration into your init file,
then the following code can serve as an example:

@lisp
(customize-set-variable
 'radio-command
 "mpv --terminal=no --video=no")

(customize-set-variable
 'radio-stations-alist
 '(("First station" . "https://example.com/first.aac")
   ("Second station" . "https://example.com/second.aac")))
@end lisp

It sets @code{mpv} as media player and registers two radio stations
called ``First station'' and ``Second station'' with their respective
URLs.

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

Radio is mainly controlled by two commands:

@defun radio station-name
Play a radio station.

When called from Lisp, @var{station-name} must be the name of one of
the stations defined in @code{radio-stations-alist}.
@end defun

@defun radio-stop
Stop playing current radio station.

If no station is being played, calling this function has no
effect.
@end defun

When invoked interactively, @code{radio} reads the station name from
the minibuffer, with completion.  Modes like @code{fido-mode} can
greatly improve user experience.

For users that prefer a more visual interface, there exists a third
command:

@cindex Tabulated view
@cindex Station list
@defun radio-list-stations
Display a list of all radio stations.
@end defun

It opens Radio's tabulated view, which shows the list of configured
radio stations as well as the play symbol next to the one being
played.  It is controlled through the following key bindings:

@table @kbd
@item @key{RET}
Play the selected radio station.

@item s
Stop playing the current radio station.
@end table

@node Copying
@appendix GNU General Public License
@include gpl.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi

@node Command Index
@unnumbered Command and Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@bye
